---
title: "Modeling unsteady and steady 1-D hydrodynamics under different hydraulic conceptualizations: Model/software development and case studies"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publications/2023-HydroHP
excerpt: 'We develop the HydroHP-1D Model: A one-dimensional full momentum solver based on de St. Venant Equations for rectangular, trapezoid, circular, parabolic, composite, and irregular cross-sections.'
date: 2023-06-01
venue: 'Environmental Modeling and Software'
# slidesurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364815223001196'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364815223001196'
citation: 'Gomes Jr, M.N., Rápalo, L.M., Oliveira, P.T., Giacomoni, M.H., do Lago, C.A. and Mendiondo, E.M., 2023. Modeling unsteady and steady 1D hydrodynamics under different hydraulic conceptualizations: Model/Software development and case studies. Environmental Modelling & Software, 167, p.105733.'
---
Abstract:
The stage-discharge relationship is affected by hysteresis, especially in 1D river cross-sections with very mild slopes, and/or where backwater effects occur. To model these cases, hydraulic property (HP) estimations (e.g., hydraulic radius and conveyance) are usually required as closed-form functions of stage. However, these are typically unavailable for complex cross-sections with overbanks. For no sediment-laden flows, we created the HydroHP-1D tool to solve the 1D Saint Venant Equations aided by the cross-section HP stored in tables. It also simulates irregular and composite hydraulic cross-sections, allows hydrodynamic simulation using the single-channel method (SCM), and proposes the divided channel method (DCM) for steady and unsteady flow analysis. A wide range of applications in rivers such as the Little Washita River and the Upper Negro River, and comparisons with NOAA normal depth solver, HEC-RAS, and with an analytical solution shows a promising scenario of applying HydroHP-1D to estimate 1D steady and unsteady hydrodynamics.
