---
title: "Modeling and Design Optimization of Looped Water Distribution Networks using MS Excel: Developing the Open-Source X-WHAT Model"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2024-Excel
excerpt: 'We developed a simple Excel spreadsheet capable of simulating the flow water problem in looped hydraulic networks and optimize the network cost by accounting for pipe properties, reservoir costs, and structural foundation costs.'
date: 2024-02-01
venue: 'on ArXiv and Submitter to Computer Applications in Engineering Education (Under Review) '
# slidesurl: '[)'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.09044'
citation: 'Gomes Jr, M.N., Benites, I.M., Elsherif, S.M., Taha, A.F. and Giacomoni, M.H., 2024. Modeling and Design Optimization of Looped Water Distribution Networks using MS Excel: Developing the Open-Source X-WHAT Model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.09044.'
---
Abstract:
Cost-effective water distribution network design with acceptable pressure performance is crucial for the management of drinking water in cities. This paper presents a Microsoft Excel tool to model, simulate, and optimize water distribution networks with looped pipelines under steady-state incompressible flow simulations. Typically, the hardy-cross method is applied using spreadsheet calculations to estimate discharges. This method requires mass-conservative initial estimates and requires successive iterations to converge. In this paper, however, we develop an alternative method that uses the built-in solver capabilities of Excel, does not require initial mass-conservative estimation, and is free of flow corrections. The main objective of this paper is to develop an open-source accessible tool for simulating hydraulic networks also adapted for teaching and learning purposes. The governing equations and the mathematical basis for the hydraulic modeling of the system are mathematically described, considering the topology of the network, mass and energy conservation, cost of tank material, foundation, and cost of pumping energy to fill the tank. The use of this tool is encouraged at the undergraduate and graduate engineering levels, as it offers the opportunity to address complex concepts such as hydraulic modeling and network optimization in a comprehensive way using a spreadsheet that does not require coding expertise. Hence, users can debug all cells and understand all equations used in the hydraulic model, as well as modify them. To demonstrate the model capabilities, three practical examples are presented, with the first one solved step by step, and the results are compared with the EPANET and with the results reported in the literature. Using the optimization method presented in this paper, it was possible to achieve a cost reduction of 151,790 USD (9.8\% of the total cost) in a network that supplies a 44,416 population. A detailed step-by-step guide on how to use the developed tool is presented in the supplemental material.
